Should be online now.
Okay.
Tena koe, Simon.
Tena koe.
Kia ora. Kia ora. We have you up for our first submitter
this morning, and we're quite tight on time today, but we've got 10
minutes allocated for your submission.
We've had an opportunity to read your submission, so you use your
time as you see fit. And if you can, just leave some time towards the end of your
10 minutes for some questions if panel members have that.
So I'll leave it in your hands. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Kia ora. Plenty of time. Tena koutou. Morena tatou.
Ko Panekire i te maunga. Ko Ngati Ruanpani mai i Waikaremoana te iwi.
Hey, shh. Sorry. Ko Te Kuha Tarewa raua ko Waimako
ngā marae. Ko Simon Lambert ahau. Honor and a privilege to speak today
to this committee in support of Ngati Ruanpani Mai Waikaremoana Claims
Settlement Bill. First want to acknowledge the immense amount of work put
in by my whanau over many years to get to this stage.
In particular my tuakana, Newton Lambert, I think I saw him there in the
room, and my tuahine, Nikki Kerekere.
Many others, of course, have been involved, and some have passed on.
Nga mihi aroha ki a koutou katoa.
Today I speak as chief scientist of Te Tere Whakamataki, Maori
environmental not-for-profit that began as Maori Biosecurity Network, now
supports research and advocacy for Maori in emergency management,
seed conservation, and climate change.
As an aside, this is my third presentation on proposed bills, the other two being
on Herds of Special Importance and the Emergency Management Bill.
Previous two times, I can assure you, I was immaculately dressed in pressed shirt
and tie. This time deliberately choosing
the high vis of TTW's on the ground workers.
And that segues into the work of a key supporter of ours, Hemi Waikai,
kaumatua from Waikaremoana, who was an inaugural member of Te Tere
Whakamataki's kāhui, along with Tohe Ashby and Kevin Prime
of Ngati Hine,
Huri Parata of Ngati Wai, Aroha Mead, Ngati Awa, Ngati Porou, Glenys
Payne, Te Atiawa, and Jim Doughty,
Ngai Tuhoe, who has passed on.
Matua Hemi was mentored by Auntie Rose Pere, a well-known figure in Te Ao
Maori and in education, and so TTW had the benefit
of her teachings reaching us through the words and actions of Matua Hemi.
His passing just two years ago emphasizes the fragility of those who
hold important mātauranga. The transfer of assets and a degree of
control to Ngati Ruanpani Mai Waikaremoana provides an investment
in the future of the iwi so that the people and their knowledge can be secured
for current challenges and the challenges for descendants in the
future. History laid out in the deed of settlement speaks to the pain and
injustice suffered by Ngati Ruanpani Mai Waikaremoana from the Crown's
actions and inactions, the violent oppression followed by
bureaucratic intransigence. This bill is accepted by mana whenua
as a significant step in reconciling their relationship with the Crown.
It's also a fundamental step needed to secure a future for those
iwi members who live at Waikaremoana.
I know several members of parliament who've been involved in this bill have visited
Waikaremoana, and while we all like to boast about our rohe being
the pito o te ao, we're a humble people and leave our land and waters to
speak for themselves.
Ana.
That's what the young people call a humble brag.
The settlement does not end Ngati Ruanpani Mai Waikaremoana's relationships with
other iwi and hapu. In fact, I'd argue it supports
whakawhanaungatanga as those resident in Waikaremoana are resourced
to protect the forests, the waters, and biodiversity there, and better able to
engage with others seeking the same outcomes of a healthier environment.
As Maori, we are witnessing a rapid undermining of our rights and opportunities
to fulfill our aspirations across the whole of Aotearoa, but particularly in our
responsibilities to protect the environment.
This settlement would provide some stability and support a baseline of investment,
clarity of aspirations, and pathways forward.
In closing, the moment is now to reconcile the Crown's historical relationship with
Ngati Ruanpani Mai Waikaremoana.
I have seen the toll on my own whanau as they have worked tirelessly on this
kaupapa. Many have already passed.
Further delay is to deny justice to the dead, the living, and those
still to come.
Kia ora.
Kia ora, Simon. That's a very strong submission. Thank you very much.
Questions, comments from panel members?
How can-
Zach, would you mind turning the camera around so Simon can see his whanau that are
in the room as well? So there, Simon, you've got some of your familiar
faces there-
Kia ora
... as you as well. But,
so no questions from panel members?
No.
No, it's very clear. It is very clear, Simon.
Thank you very much for the time you put into your written submission and also
coming before us this morning. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Kia ora koutou.
Thank you.
Now, Te Wairoa, I bet the next one I have. Yeah.
We're on Zoom as well.
They're present as well. Okay. Oh, kia ora. Kia ora mai.
So we can now bring you forward now, please. Thank you.
Can we have the rest of his time, too? No.
Come forward, please.
So just so that you're aware, these are recorded public
hearings that we conduct here-
Yep
... as well, so it is actually live-streamed as well.
But thank you very much for coming before us today, and thank you for the
submission you have provided. And as you heard before, we have 10
minutes allocated, and please use that time as you see fit.
So kia ora.
Ka pai.
Ano ireta komiti, tena koutou.
Tena koe.
Whakarongo ki ta matou korero,
and we'll tell you all you need to know.
Tuatahi, mihi ana ki te ahi ka o te waikauka.
E Newt ana,
e Hakara ma. E mihi ana ki a koutou,
nga tuakana, nga tungane o Ngati
RuanpaniThank
you
for the opportunity to speak. And I want to begin by stating very
clearly that we do not oppose Ngati Ruapani reaching
settlement.
Our concern is not with Ruapani settling, it is with the Crown's process,
which now risks extinguishing the rights of others with
long-lasting
interests in the Waikaremoana Rohe.
For some time, the debate focused on Onehoto.
We speak more particularly about the lands in Schedule
2 of the bill.
But what seems like at the last moment, the Crown expanded the
settlement footprint dramatically to include
what are the six blocks that are in there now,
many of which were never part of earlier discussions as far as we
are aware, through those who were
negotiating on our behalf or part of those conversations.
And this is a central issue. By placing all of the Schedule 2
lands into Te Urewera, the Crown is transferring them into the
absolute control, as far as we see, of Ngai Tuhoe.
And that doesn't mean that we have any problems with Tuhoe either, including
the areas that we believe are not Tuhoe whenua.
More particularly in the Ruakituri, and the general area that we refer
to as the Patunamu, Waihe and parts
of the Maungani.
Some of these blocks may reflect shared interest between
Kahungunu and Ruapani, but others, including those that I said
around Patunamu and Ruakituri,
we recognize as exclusive Kahungunu territory.
Recognized through whakapapa, occupation, and generations of use.
These areas,
as far as our pakake told us,
were not part of the Tuhoe Rohe and should not be absorbed into a
governance structure where Tuhoe holds sole authority.
The bill itself shows the scale of what is being transferred.
The one block in the Maungani conservation area being over
almost 4,000 hectares on its own.
And the Crown's expedited process has not allowed all iwi
with overlapping interests to participate fully, especially those of
us without a direct relationship with the settlement entity.
Some responsibility also lies with the post-settlement structures that were
expected to manage these relationships on our behalf, but have not
been able to.
Our pakake were very clear about the boundaries
in the Waikaremoana area. They consistently held that the
undisputed Tuhoe territory was north of the Hopuruahine River.
The Crown's own historical actions reflected this understanding, with the
Kahungunu Reserve sitting to the south of the Hopuruahine outlet, and
the Tuhoe Reserve to the north.
Those placements were deliberate and based on the knowledge of the people who
lived in that time. Our whanau have land interests near
Waikareiti in the Manuoha and Paharekeke blocks, and
around Ruakituri and Pakuni in the Tahora blocks.
Our people are owners in Kahotea and Piko Ngaehe,
not to mention the Timi Taihua. Yet through this settlement, our mana whenua
no longer extends to the areas immediately surrounding these lands.
And our whanau who are of a Ngati Ruapani whakapapa are
excluded because they do not meet the narrow membership criteria of
the settlement entity. So although they are Ngati Ruapani
whakapapa,
some of them don't descend from two Waipukehore
and,
there were three tipuna.
The question of interest in Waikaremoana has been settled repeatedly as far as
we're concerned over the past 200 years,
through the Tatou Poana
some 200 years ago. Again, when the national park was
established, and again with the settlement of the lake bed ownership in the
1960s.
To now override those understandings is to claim that we know
better than the people who lived in those times.
Some of these people,
some of our inland whanaunga,
refer to us townies as loyalist kupapa.
But at least they say it to our face.
And by their definition,
maybe we are.
But we're not sellouts.
We've always stood for honoring agreements and for protecting the rights handed
down to us by our tipuna.
Today, we ask the committee to ensure that our rights are not extinguished
in the pursuit of another iwi settlement, and that Schedule
2 does not become a mechanism for transferring lands into Te
Urewera where they do not belong.
There is room for all of us,
but only if the Crown's processes recognize the full history,
the full whakapapa, and the full set of relationships that
exist in the Waikaremoana and surrounding areas.
And therefore, tena koutou, tena koutou, kia ora tatou
katoa.
Kia ora. If I could ask the first question, and we always try to be
solution-focused here.
Mm-hmm.
Is
the submission on the premise that
your local area are not heavily involved in the governance
of Te Urewera as it's proposed in its whole entirety?
We're not involved. Haven't been able to be involved with the governance
of Te Urewera at all.
I believe that in the early stages of our settlement,
that that was something that we had to work on,
but the relationship has just fallen over.
So if you can't get past that, well,
how do you exercise-mana whenua over
whenua tupuna.
And understanding that this in question is the Ruapani
settlement itself, would Ruapani's involvement in the
governance
go some way to alleviating your concerns?
Not if our people who have a whakapapa interest in that area,
traditionally and historically,
are not able to register as members of the post-settlement entity.
So that you would like to expand the three tupuna to a
fourth one to include your whakapapa line?
Not necessarily.
Like I said, it's been recognized
time and time again over the last 200 years that there is almost a
tripartite relationship between two, Ruapani and Ngati
Kahungunu i te Wairoa with regard to Te Urewera, and more
specifically, Waikaremoana.
And so I suppose that's the sort of arrangement that we
would like to work towards or
that we would settle, that we have
a three-way relationship to
make decisions or to lead that governance strategy and
protection
of the ngahere of the
moana.
In all ways,
you can't go past the ahikaa, the people that actually live there.
And so there's a special and very important role that they play as well in terms
of leading that, as far as we're concerned.
Yeah.
Maybe
in support of my whanau here.
We are a kāhui trust within the PSG of Tatau
Tatau.
And
our marae hapu within this kāhui
have traditional links to the area in
question.
So
I think
within the settlement there is a
partnership agreement
with the Te Urewera board, hence
seven or eight years down the track of settlement
we've still failed to
make that connection.
Obviously, there's an issue there.
Like we said, we haven't got no issues with our whanau of the
lake, and
it's just how we
find a solution around that. And
we did have talks earlier in terms of Tatau and
my role in there. I'm trustee with this trust, and I'm
also a
trustee on the PSG on behalf of this trust.
Right. We have
Tatau Tatau coming for
us this afternoon as well.
Yeah. So yeah.
I
suppose the history within the settlement and the partnership
agreement with the
Te Urewera board has failed us in terms of our
interests, and so
that connection there.
Hence our
members within
our marae hapu within this kāhui entrusted
us to put this submission through.
Kia ora. Yeah.
So, yeah.
Okay, Steve.
Kia ora. Thank you very much. And I'm just trying to
understand the
overlap question. So you don't
negate
Ruapani Mai
Waikaremoana
as ahikaa and their right to settlement in that regard,
but are concerned that Kahungunu is not fully
recognized in its interests and want to be sure that
in a post-settlement arrangement, there is that recognition?
Is that correct?
I think
not so much as more than the recognition,
I suppose.
How do we practice that?
An active practicing of-
And that's what we don't see-
Yeah
...
in terms of the reserves going into Te Urewera.
Yeah.
Hence the breakdown between the two
entities, the Urewera board and our
PSG of Wairoa, Tatau Tatau.
So
again
the area of interest is a
concern to us. That's why.
And
my ongoing, I suppose that my own family's ongoing
use of my father's side and it should with our
whanau here
from the Koutou area on the Waiaua River,
that's the Mangahoune Reserve, right across to the Rotokare
on that side of that waipou. So,
ongoing use and everything, and
undisputed I suppose concerning all those areas of
interest,
so.
Any last questions from members? Submitters?
Ana whakamua ana tena kōrua.
Yeah.
Going forward, in an ideal
situation, what would be the
recommendation to us on how you could reach a place
of not unity, but
to progress the bill? Not as it is, but what is one key area
that you recommend to us that would
satisfy koutou, Te Wairoa?
I think
one aspect as well is
a solution that some of us came--
I was working with Ruapani
in terms of we understand these other whānau here that
do not recognise the claim.
However,
we recognise our whānau as Ruapani
as well,
not a hapū body. So moving forward,
working alongside the area interest of Tātou with our
kawe, because we have seven.
Yeah.
We are one of the ones in town. However, our whakapapa
goes all the way to the lake. So the solution was to
work with our whānau, and in terms of ensuring
the taiao was number one on our...
And at that time was working with DOC at that
time. So how do we move forward with that?
If the talks have broken down at due to at a board level.
Mm.
So how do we-- That's why we wanted to see if we can work with DOC.
We understand having the ministries ship the site
and let us control. However,
those breakdowns, I suppose, I'm always going back to that.
Mm.
How do we move on,
moving forward again?
There also could be opportunity if we were given time and the space
to negotiate other arrangements, especially in the blocks further to the
south, where we might have some sort of co-management arrangements
between
Kahungunu and Ruapani or Tātou Tātou and Ngāti Ruapani, Ngāi
Wai, Karemoana.
So that could be an option as well that we'd be open to exploring.
Yeah, but other than that, we support absolutely everything else in the
bill, and we recommend that you give them more money.
One more question on that-
Yeah
... is what timeframe do you envisage that sort of
renegotiation should, if it were to go there, how long would that
take?
Yeah.
That's the question.
Longer than 10 minutes?
If we could have longer than 10 minutes.
Right.
Unfortunately not this morning.
No.
But I think the point is, for it to be enduring, it takes time-
Yeah
... to be able to do that itself. And as you can hear, the bells are
ringing. And I apologize to everybody.
We're in extended hours, as they term it here in Parliament,
and we're actually literally due in the House in about six minutes, and
many of us are actually doing speeches. We've actually got Whanganui.
We've got an hapū or iwi or Whanganui
first reading for their settlement.
And following that-
Mm
... we've actually got three iwi, Ngāti Hei, Ngāti
Rāhiri Tumutumu, Ngāti Tara Tokanui.
They're the three Hauraki iwi, and we're actually doing a combined
third reading, so it's the final stage of their settlement.
That's happening in the House
this morning. I'm not sure whether there'll be room for you to be able to go up
there or anything like that to see it from the gallery.
If you wish to do that, it's probably going to be chock-a-block, to tell the truth.
But thank you very much. I should have acknowledged, I realize that many of you, if
not all of you, have traveled significant distances to be here this
morning. So I do want to acknowledge that.
And I apologize, we're going to suspend the meeting
now, and we're going to start, it's either at 1:00 or two minutes after the
bells ring, if we're actually going a little bit past
1:00. And so that's when we're going to
reconvene, and we've got a number of submissions this afternoon, one, two, three,
four submissions this afternoon, and then we'll be concluding our
hearing specifically after that itself.
So we will suspend the meeting now.
Thank you very much for your submission today.
Thank you.
Tena koutou.
Appreciate it. Yep, and
kia ora mai to next group.
Yeah.
Yeah